##  ipfixDump manual page       -*- mode: text; fill-column: 79 -*-

##  Copyright 2014-2023 Carnegie Mellon University
##  See license information in LICENSE.txt.

=pod

=head1 NAME

B<ipfixDump> - Print contents of an IPFIX file as human-readable text

=head1 SYNOPSIS

 ipfixDump [--in FILE_NAME] [--out FILE_NAME]
           [--rfc5610] [--element-file FILE_NAME] [--yaf]
           [{ --show=SHOW_LIST | --templates | --data |
              --template-counts | --file-stats }]
           [--octet-format=FORMAT] [--string-format=FORMAT]
           [--suppress=ITEM_LIST]

 ipfixDump [--version]

 ipfixDump [--help]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<ipfixDump> is a tool to read an IPFIX file and print its contents as
human-readable text to assist the user in analyzing the file.  By default,
B<ipfixDump> prints all message headers, templates, data records, options
templates, and options records to the output, plus a one line summary of the
file's content.

To select different output, use the B<--show>, B<--templates>, B<--data>, 
B<--template-counts>, or B<--file-stats> switches.

B<ipfixDump> supports IPFIX structured data in the form of basicLists,
subTemplateLists, and subTemplateMultiLists.

By default, B<ipfixDump> reads the IPFIX file from the standard input and
writes the text to the standard output.  To specify the input or output file's
location, use the B<--in> or B<--out> option, respectively.

B<ipfixDump> requires the input file to contain the IPFIX templates that
describe the data records within the file, and the template must appear before
the records that use it.  Any records that do not have a corresponding template
are ignored.

The default information model used by B<ipfixDump> includes only the standard
information elements defined by
L<IANA|https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipfix/ipfix.xhtml> and provided by
libfixbuf.  There are three ways to augment the set of elements:

=over 4

=item 1

The B<--rfc5610> option instructs B<ipfixDump> to watch the input for options
records that define private enterprise information elements (as defined by
L<RFC5610|https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc5610.html>) and to add any unknown
elements to the information model.

=item 2

The B<--element-file=I<FILE_NAME>> option tells B<ipfixDump> to parse the
contents of I<FILE_NAME> and add those information elements to the information
model.  The argument is an XML file whose schema is that used by IANA's L<XML
Information Element Registry|https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipfix/ipfix.xml>,
with the following additions:

=over 4

=item cert:enterpriseId

A number representing the Private Enterprise Number of the element

=item cert:reversible

A boolean value (C<true>, C<yes>, or C<1> for true; C<false>, C<no>, or C<0>
for false) that specifies whether the element may have a separate identity in a
reverse flow.

=back

The B<--element-file> option may be used multiple times to load multiple files,
and the loaded elements replace existing elements with the same identifier.

=item 3

The B<--yaf> option loads the CERT private enterprise information elements into
the information model.  These elements are used by the NetSA tools B<yaf(1)>,
B<pipeline(8)>, B<super_mediator(1)>, and B<rwsilk2ipfix(1)>.  This option is
implemented as a wrapper over the B<--element-file> option where the file name
is F<cert_ipfix.xml> and B<ipfixDump> checks several directories to attempt to
find this file, stopping once it finds the first file.  The list of
directories, in search order, is

=over 4

=item *

the directory F<../share/libfixbuf> relative to the directory containing the
application

=item *

the F<libfixbuf> subdirectory of the C<datadir> directory specified when
B<ipfixDump> was configured (defaults to F<$prefix/share>)

=item *

the F<share/libfixbuf> subdirectory installation folder for the GLib-2 library

=item *

the F<libfixbuf> subdirectory of the directories specified by the
$XDG_DATA_DIRS environment variable, or F</usr/local/share> and
F</usr/share/libfixbuf> when that variable is empty

=back

B<ipfixDump> exits with an error if the B<--yaf> option is given and it is
unable to find the F<cert_ipfix.xml> file.  See
L<https://tools.netsa.cert.org/cert-ipfix-registry/> for additional information
about this file.

=back

=head1 OPTIONS

The following options are available for B<ipfixDump>:

=over 4

=item B<--in> I<FILE_NAME>

Sets the input file name to I<FILE_NAME>.  When the option is not specified,
B<ipfixDump> reads from the standard input or exits with an error when the
standard input is a terminal.  B<ipfixDump> reads from the standard input if
I<FILE_NAME> is 'C<->'.  Short option: B<-i>.

=item B<--out> I<FILE_NAME>

Sets the output file name to I<FILE_NAME>.  If I<FILE_NAME> exists, it is
overwritten.  The string 'C<->' may be used to write to standard output (the
default).  Short option: B<-o>.

=item B<--rfc5610>

Tells B<ipfixDump> to scan the IPFIX input file for options records that define
private enterprise information elements and to add the unknown elements to the
information model.

=item B<--element-file> I<FILE_NAME>

Loads the XML file I<FILE_NAME> and incorporates information element
information found in it.  The format of the file is described above.  The
option may be used multiple times to load multiple files, and later elements
replace existing elements when they have the same identifier.  Short option:
B<-e>.

=item B<--yaf>

Searches for a file named F<cert_ipfix.xml> in several locations and loads that
file as if it was an argument to B<--element-file>.  B<ipfixDump> exits with an
error if it is unable to find the F<cert_ipfix.xml> file.  Short option: B<-y>.

=item B<--show>=I<SHOW_LIST>

Causes the output to contain only the categories specified in I<SHOW_LIST>, a
comma-separated list of the names described below.  When none of B<--show> or
the other output selector options is given, B<ipfixDump> defaults to
B<--show=templates,data>.  This option has precedence over the other output
selectors.  Short option: B<-s>.

=over 4

=item templates

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print the template records that appear in the input and
to print the message header and footer (statistics) for messages that contain
template records.

=item data

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print the data records that were read from the input and
to print the message header and footer (statistics) for messages that contain
data records.

=item messages

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print the message header and message footer (statistics)
for all messages.

=item template-counts

Causes B<ipfixDump> to print, after the data and template records, a two or
three column table where each row is includes a template ID defined in the
input and the number of times data using that template was seen.  If the input
contains template description option records, the table includes the template
name as the third column.  The counts include uses in subTemplateLists and
subTemplateMultiLists when a data record is present.  If a list specifies a
template ID but the list is empty, the count for that template ID is unchanged.

=item file-stats

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print, at the end of the data and after the
template-count table, the flowEndMilliseconds timestamps for the first and last
record in the input, the minimum and maximum flowEndMilliseconds timestamps
seen, and the message export times of the first and last IPFIX messages.

=back

When B<--show> includes any of B<templates>, B<data>, B<messages>, or
B<flow-stats>, the last line of the output summarizes the number of messages,
number of data records, and number of templates records contained in the input.

=item B<--templates>

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print only template definitions and the message headers
and footers for messages that contain a template set.  May not be used with
B<--data>, B<--file-stats>, or B<--template-counts>.  Equivalent to
B<--show=templates>.  Short option: B<-t>.

=item B<--data>

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print only data records and the message headers and
footers for messages that contain a data set.  May not be used with
B<--templates>, B<--file-stats>, or B<--template-counts>.  Equivalent to
B<--show=data>.  Short option: B<-d>.

=item B<--template-counts>

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print only a table showing the template IDs defined in
the input and the number of times data using that template was seen.  May not
be used with B<--templates>, B<--data>, or B<--file-stats>.  Equivalent to
B<--show=template-counts>.  Short option: B<-c>.

=item B<--file-stats>

Tells B<ipfixDump> to print only the flowEndMilliseconds timestamps for the
first and last record in the input, the minimum and maximum flowEndMilliseconds
timestamps seen, and the message export times of the first and last IPFIX
messages.  Equivalent to B<--show=file-stats>.  Short option: B<-f>.

=item B<--octet-format>=I<FORMAT>

Sets the output for data record elements whose type is B<octetArray>.  The
output always includes the length of the octetArray surrounded by square
brackets (e.g., C<[4]>) before the displayed value, if any.  If the value's
length is 0, only the length is printed.  The default format is C<short-hex>.

=over 4

=item none

Does not display anything other than the length.

=item hexadecimal

Outputs C<0x> and then the hexadecimal value for each octet in the octetArray,
e.g., C<[4] 0x666f6f0a>.

=item short-hex

If the octetArray is a I<fixed-width> element and its length is eight or less,
displays the value in the C<hexadecimal> format, otherwise displays nothing.

=item base64

Displays the value using base-64 encoding, e.g., C<[4] Zm9vCg==>.

=item hexdump

Displays the value in the style of the B<hexdump(1)> utility when invoked with
the arguments C<-v -C>.  The output displays 16 octets of the value on each
line.  Each line has the same prefix as that of the element name followed by a
vertical bar that aligns with the element name.  That is followed by the line's
offset displayed in hexadecimal, up to 16 octets each presented as a
hexadecimal number, a vertical bar, those 16 octets presented as ASCII with a
period for any non-printable or control character, followed by another vertical
bar and a newline.  The final line is displays the length of the value in
hexadecimal. For example:

 [4]
 | 00000000  66 6f 6f 0a                                       |foo.            |
 | 00000004

=item string

Displays the value as a string in double quotes (C<">).  Octet values 34 and 92
are displayed as C<\"> and C<\\> respectively, other octet values from 32
(space) to 126 (tilde) inclusive are displayed as ASCII, and all other values
are shown as escaped utf-8 (C<\uNNNN>.  For example, C<[4] "foo\u000A"> where
C<\u000A> represents a newline.

=back

=item B<--string-format>=I<FORMAT>

Sets the output for data record elements whose type is B<string>.  The output
always includes the length of the string surrounded by square brackets (C<[4]>)
before the displayed value, if any.  The default format is C<quoted>.

=over 4

=item quoted

Displays the value as a string in double quotes (C<">).  Octet values 34 and 92
are displayed as C<\"> and C<\\>, respectively, other octet values from 32
(space) to 126 (tilde) inclusive are displayed as ASCII, octet values 9 (tab),
10 (newline), and 13 (carriage return) are displayed as C<\t>, C<\n>, and C<\r>
respectively, and all other values are displayed as 2-character hexadecimal
with a leading C<\x>.  For example, C<[4] "foo\n">.  When the value's length is
0, output is C<[0] "">.

=item raw

Displays the raw string with no surrounding quotes and making no attempt to
escape control characters.  This is the behavior of B<ipfixDump> before version
3.0.0.

=item base64

Displays the value using base-64 encoding, e.g., C<[4] Zm9vCg==>.  If the
value's length is 0, only the length is printed.

=item hexdump

Displays the value in the style of the B<hexdump(1)> utility when invoked with
the arguments C<-v -C>.  This format is described above under
B<--octet-format>.

=item hexadecimal

Outputs C<0x> and then the hexadecimal value for each octet in the string,
e.g., C<[4] 0x666f6f0a>.  If the value's length is 0, only the length is
printed.

=item none

Does not display anything other than the length.

=back

=item B<--suppress>=I<ITEM_LIST>

Disables the display of the items in I<ITEM_LIST>.  This may be useful when
using B<ipfixDump> to compare IPFIX files.  The following items may be
suppressed:

=over 4

=item record-number

For top-level records, do not display the record number.

=item export-time

Do not display the export time in the message header.

=item stream-offset

Do not display the stream offset in the message header.

=item message-length

Do not display the message length in the message header.

=item sequence-number

Do not display the sequence number in the message header.

=item messages

Disables printing of the message header and message footer.  The output still
includes the number of messages, records, and templates seen in the file once
the end of the input is reached.  This overrides B<--show=messages>.

=back

=item B<--version>

Causes B<ipfixDump> to print the version and copyright information to standard
error and exit.  Short option: B<-V>.

=item B<--help>

Causes B<ipfixDump> to print a brief usage message to the standard output and
exit.  Short option: B<-h>.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

In the following examples, the dollar sign ("$") represents the shell
prompt.  The text after the dollar sign represents the command line.

 $ ipfixDump --in - --out -

 $ ipfixDump --in /data/ipfix.ipfix --out /data/text.txt --yaf

The B<ipfixDump> output for a complete IPFIX message that contains a single
options template record is:

 --- Message Header ---
 export time: 2021-02-09 19:56:53	observation domain id: 0
 message length: 62              	sequence number: 0 (0)
 stream offset: 0

 --- Options Template Record --- tid: 53254 (0xd006), fields: 9, scope: 2 ---
   privateEnterpriseNumber              (346) <uint32>       [4] {scope}
   informationElementId                 (303) <uint16>       [2] {scope}
   informationElementDataType           (339) <uint8>        [1]
   informationElementSemantics          (344) <uint8>        [1]
   informationElementUnits              (345) <uint16>       [2]
   informationElementRangeBegin         (342) <uint64>       [8]
   informationElementRangeEnd           (343) <uint64>       [8]
   informationElementName               (341) <string>   [65535]
   informationElementDescription        (340) <string>   [65535]

 *** Msg Stats: 1 Template Records ***

Here is an example record that includes a subTemplateList:

 --- Data Record 1332161 --- fields: 7, tmpl: 53252 (0xd004) tombstone_record ---
   observationDomainId                 (149){s} : 0
   exportingProcessId                  (144){s} : 45982
   exporterConfiguredId           (6871/551){s} : 4646
   paddingOctets                       (210)    : [6]
   tombstoneId                    (6871/550)    : 0
   observationTimeSeconds              (322)    : 2021-02-09 20:01:53
   tombstoneAccessList            (6871/554)    : count: 1 {noneOf} tmpl: 53253 (0xd005) tombstone_access
   +--- STL Record 1 --- fields: 2, tmpl: 53253 (0xd005) tombstone_access ---
   + certToolId                     (6871/553) : 1
   + observationTimeSeconds              (322) : 2021-02-09 20:01:53


=head1 AUTHORS

Emily Sarneso and the CERT Network Situational Awareness Group Engineering
Team, E<lt>http://www.cert.org/netsaE<gt>.

Bug reports may be sent directly to the Network Situational Awareness team at
E<lt>netsa-help@cert.orgE<gt>.

=head1 SEE ALSO

B<yaf(1)>, B<yafscii(1)>, B<yafdpi(1)>, B<super_mediator(1)>, B<ipfix2json(1)>,
B<pipeline(8)>, B<rwsilk2ipfix(1)>,
L<https://tools.netsa.cert.org/cert-ipfix-registry/>,
L<https://www.iana.org/assignments/ipfix/ipfix.xhtml>

=cut

##  @DISTRIBUTION_STATEMENT_BEGIN@
##  libfixbuf 3.0.0
##
##  Copyright 2022 Carnegie Mellon University.
##
##  NO WARRANTY. THIS CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY AND SOFTWARE ENGINEERING
##  INSTITUTE MATERIAL IS FURNISHED ON AN "AS-IS" BASIS. CARNEGIE MELLON
##  UNIVERSITY MAKES NO WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EITHER EXPRESSED OR IMPLIED,
##  AS TO ANY MATTER INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, WARRANTY OF FITNESS FOR
##  PURPOSE OR MERCHANTABILITY, EXCLUSIVITY, OR RESULTS OBTAINED FROM USE OF
##  THE MATERIAL. CARNEGIE MELLON UNIVERSITY DOES NOT MAKE ANY WARRANTY OF
##  ANY KIND WITH RESPECT TO FREEDOM FROM PATENT, TRADEMARK, OR COPYRIGHT
##  INFRINGEMENT.
##
##  Released under a GNU GPL 2.0-style license, please see LICENSE.txt or
##  contact permission@sei.cmu.edu for full terms.
##
##  [DISTRIBUTION STATEMENT A] This material has been approved for public
##  release and unlimited distribution.  Please see Copyright notice for
##  non-US Government use and distribution.
##
##  Carnegie Mellon(R) and CERT(R) are registered in the U.S. Patent and
##  Trademark Office by Carnegie Mellon University.
##
##  This Software includes and/or makes use of the following Third-Party
##  Software subject to its own license:
##
##  1. GLib-2.0 (https://gitlab.gnome.org/GNOME/glib/-/blob/main/COPYING)
##     Copyright 1995 GLib-2.0 Team.
##
##  2. Doxygen (http://www.gnu.org/licenses/old-licenses/gpl-2.0.html)
##     Copyright 2021 Dimitri van Heesch.
##
##  DM22-0006
##  @DISTRIBUTION_STATEMENT_END@
